Noelo/dspipe (#1)
RedHatQuickCourses/rhods-pipelines: modules/chapter1/pages/section2.adoc

= Section 1

> == Introduction to Data Science Pipelines

Reviewer: As per design doc, I think section 1 is  a general introduction to DS pipelines with basic terminology definitions and the types KF and ELyra and whatever else is coming into GA version. Section 2 should be about KF in particular and section 3 about ELyra.

A data science pipeline is like a recipe for turning raw data into useful insights. Just like when you cook, you follow a set of steps to prepare a meal, in data science, you follow a series of steps to analyze data and extract valuable information. Here's a simple breakdown of what a data science pipeline involves:

> 

Reviewer: we could use a nice diagram here. Even a hand drawn one at this point is OK. we can convert the hand drawn one to actual png using draw.io or something like that later

9. **Monitoring and Maintenance**: Just as a chef may need to adjust the recipe over time to maintain the quality of the dish, data science models may need updates and monitoring to ensure they remain accurate and relevant.

10. **Reporting and Communication**: Finally, you share your findings and insights, much like serving your meal and explaining how it was prepared to your guests.

So, a data science pipeline is like a step-by-step guide that takes raw data, processes it, uses it to build models, and then communicates the results to help make informed decisions or predictions. It's a structured approach to turning data into valuable knowledge.

In more technical terms A *pipeline* is a description of an ML workflow, including all of the components in the workflow and how they combine in the form of a graph. The pipeline includes the definition of the inputs (parameters) required to run the pipeline and the inputs and outputs of each component.

[NOTE]
====
ML Pipleines are a basically an execution graph of tasks, commonly known as a _DAG_ (Directed Acyclic Graph).

> A DAG is a directed graph with no cycles aka no direct loops

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A DAG is a directed graph with no cycles aka no direct loops.
```

====

== Data Science Pipelines in OpenShift AI

> OpenShift AI offers two out of the box mechanisms to build Data Science Pipelines

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OpenShift AI offers two out of the box mechanisms to build Data Science Pipelines.
```

The first mechanism is the Elyra Jupyter notebook addon which provides a visual editor for creating pipelines via orchestration of Jupyter notebooks. 

> The second mechanism and the one discussed here is using Data Science Pipelines (DSP) based on the upstream KubeflowPipelines V1. With DSP, pipelines are python scripts built using the KFPV1 python SDK. Once built the python pipeline is submitted to the DSP runtime to be scheduled for execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second mechanism and the one discussed here is using Data Science Pipelines (DSP) based on the upstream KubeflowPipelines V1. With DSP, pipelines are python scripts built using the KFPV1 python SDK. Once built, the python pipeline is submitted to the DSP runtime to be scheduled for execution.
```

[NOTE]
====
There is work in progress to migrate DSP to Kubeflow Pipeline V2. At the time of writing this is still a work in progress and we won't cover it here.
====

In OpenShift AI we use the *_Tekton_* runtime to execute pipelines. With this there is an additional step to be performed the python script needs to be compiled into a Tekton definition before being submitting to the runtime

> In OpenShift AI the Data Science Pipeline runtime consists of the following components

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In OpenShift AI the Data Science Pipeline runtime consists of the following components:
```

* A Data Science Pipeline Server container a number of resources 
* A MariaDB for storing pipeline definitions and results

> * A Pipeline scheduler for scheduling pipeline runs

Reviewer 2: Include the periods for consistency.

```suggestion
* A Data Science Pipeline Server container a number of resources. 
* A MariaDB for storing pipeline definitions and results.
* A Pipeline scheduler for scheduling pipeline runs.
```

Reviewer 2: How do Tekton and KFP map to these components? Are they used by the Data Science Pipeline Server? Are they included in the other components?

* A Persistent Agent to record the set of containers that executed as well as their inputs and outputs.

> As pipelines are executed multiple ephemeral pods will be created and terminated depending on the execution steps of the pipelines

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As pipelines are executed multiple ephemeral pods will be created and terminated depending on the execution steps of the pipelines.
```

[NOTE]
====

> DS Pipeline in OpenShift AI are managed by the 'data-science-pipelines-operator-controller-manager' operator in the redhat-ods-applications namespace. The CRD is an instance of _datasciencepipelinesapplications.datasciencepipelinesapplications.opendatahub.io_

Reviewer 2: You might want to improve the rendering of resource names.

```suggestion
DS Pipeline in OpenShift AI are managed by the `data-science-pipelines-operator-controller-manager` operator in the `redhat-ods-applications` namespace. The CRD is an instance of _datasciencepipelinesapplications.datasciencepipelinesapplications.opendatahub.io_
```

====

.DataScience Pipeline pods
****
[source,cmd]
----

>  ~/oc get pods

Reviewer 2: Make it clear that you are listing pods in the right namespace. Also, emphasizing the command helps students differentiate the command from the output.

I'd also suggest changing the prompt to `$` for consistency with the other courses.

```suggestion
*$ oc get pods -n redhat-ods-applications*
```

NAME                                                              READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
ds-pipeline-persistenceagent-pipelines-definition-6d6676d58vzss   1/1     Running   0          9m49s
ds-pipeline-pipelines-definition-7c7dd56b4d-qfz8t                 2/2     Running   0          9m49s
ds-pipeline-scheduledworkflow-pipelines-definition-7f5c645hcg4g   1/1     Running   0          9m48s
mariadb-pipelines-definition-795c57795b-27ljh                     1/1     Running   0          9m49s
----
****

> == Creating a Data Science Pipeline with KFP

Reviewer: Clearly demarcate when the lecture narrative ends, and when the actual hands-on lab exercise begins - by prefixing the sub setion with Lab: or Exercise:. See rhods-intro repo for sample

Reviewer 2: Are we supposed to run this activity in a RHODS workbench or locally on our laptop? We should clarify that.

Reviewer 2: Also, if they have to create a workbench, let's tell them which one. I assume "Minimal Python" should be ok.

=== Prerequisites 
****
* Python Setup
[source,cmd]
----
pip install kfp==1.8
pip install kfp-tekton==1.7.2
----

* S3 Storage

Follow these instructions to setup a local Minio instance
https://ai-on-openshift.io/tools-and-applications/minio/minio/
****

=== Creating a Pipeline Server

To execute pipelines a _Pipeline server_ needs to be created but before that can happen an S3 Storage bucket needs to be created. This is used to store the run artifacts and outputs of any pipeline run on the associated server. 
****
image::creating-data-connection.png[]
****
Once the data connection is created then the pipeline server can be created
****

> image::pre-creating-pipeline-server.png[]

Reviewer: None of the images are rendering in the HTML. You have put the images along side the adoc. Please move all image files to a folder under chapter 1 called images, then all the images should render. Please see rhods-intro repo for example adoc files with correct references to images and videos.

Reviewer: Also move all code that students need to clone into the rhod-qc-apps repo. Embedded code snippets can be put here and referenced in code call outs. Actual lab hands-on code should NOT live in this repo but moved to rhods-qc-apps. See rhods-intro repo for examples. You can embed markdown instructions and comments in the Jupyter notebooks themselves - again, see example notebook files in rhods-qc-apps repo under chapter 1 folder

Author: This isn't hand on lab code, this is code snippits that demonstrate functionality. They need to be in the same repo  otherwise they'll get out of sync. How can I achieve this ?

****
image::creating-pipeline-run.png[]
****

The pipeline will execute and the outputs will be stored into the configured S3 bucket.
As the pipeline executes the view will be updated to show the steps being executed. It's possible to click on the graph nodes to reveal information of the steps

****
image::post-pipeline-run.png[]
****

Once the pipeline has completed it is possible to access the output and pipeline artifacts (if used) in the Minio Storage UI

****
image::object-store-after-run.png[]
****

== Advanced Example

In this section we're going to demonstrate how Data Science Pipelines work in a real world scenario. 

****
In this scenario we have a remote edge device which uses an AI model to manage the characteristics of its battery usage depending on the environment it's deployed in. On a regular schedule it uploads battery events via a data gateway and those batter events are used to train a model which is then retrieved by the device and used. 

image::openshift-ai-dsp-edge.png[]
****

> The entire pipeline is here link:sample-pipeline-full.py[Pipeline]

Reviewer 2: The link is not working.

Author: fixed

We're not going to go through all of it but focus on the key aspects of it. 

The actual pipeline is defined by the following function

****
[source,python]

> include::sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=450..454]

Reviewer 2: This python snippet is not being rendered 

![image](https://github.com/RedHatQuickCourses/rhods-pipelines/assets/675470/44b8b292-23a7-4def-aea5-d9bab2713659)

Reviewer 2: Same problem occurs in the rest of python snippets below.

Author: yep I've fixed the rendering issue. I don't think a workbench needs to be created to use a DSP

****

> The '@dsl.pipeline' parameters provide the name and description if you were uploading the pipeline via an API call. The DSP UI overwrites these values.

Reviewer 2: Are students asked to run this advanced example? or are these just a set of shallow instructors for them to experiment with?

I tried to run the python script but I get this error:

```
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/opt/app-root/src/full-pipeline.py", line 511, in <module>
    compiler.compile(batterytest_pipeline, __file__.replace('.py', '.yaml'),tekton_pipeline_conf=pipeline_conf)
NameError: name 'batterytest_pipeline' is not defined
```

Author: nope they're not intended to be run

****
[source,python]
include::sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=471]

[source,python]
include::sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=477]

[source,python]
include::sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=482]

[source,python]
include::sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=492]

[source,python]
include::sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=495]

****

The execution order of the graph is top down but also can be controlled by using the *_.after()_* operator. The following diagram shows the order of execution.

****
image::pipeline-graph.png[]
****

Also visable in the OpenShift AI user interface

****
image::oai-pipeline-graph.png[]
****

=== Pipeline Parameter Passing
As each step of our pipeline is an independent container, passing values between these steps requires a persistent store to be used between steps. This is where the associated S3 bucket that we configured earlier comes into play.

In our pipeline there is a number of data values passed between the steps. For example :

* The output of the _trigger_data_ step is passed into the input of the _prep_train_data_op_ step.
* The _upload_model_op_ uses the output of the _trigger_data_ and one of the *_named outputs_* of the _prep_train_data_ step. 

> ==== Difference 

Reviewer 2: Are we missing content in this `Difference` section?

Author: yep not finished as yet

= Section 2

== Data Science Pipelines in OpenShift AI

== Data Science Pipeline Concepts

> * *Pipeline* -  is a machine learning workflow definition containing the steps and their inputs and outputs artifacts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* *Pipeline* -  is a workflow definition containing the steps and their input and output artifacts.
```

> * *Step* - (AKA _pipeline component_) is a self-contained bundle of code that represents an execution stage in the pipeline.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* *Step* - is a self-contained pipeline component that represents an execution stage in the pipeline.
```

> * *Experiment* - is a logical grouping of runs where you can try different pipeline configurations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* *Experiment* - is a logical grouping of runs for the purpose of comparing different pipeline configurations, for instance.
```

Reviewer 3: Move after *Run* as it refers to the "run" concept.

> * *Run* - is a _single_ execution of a pipeline whereas a recurring run is a scheduled, repeatable execution of a pipeline.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* *Run* - is a _single_ execution of a pipeline whereas a _recurring run_ is a scheduled, repeated execution of a pipeline.
```

[NOTE]
====

> Pipleines are a basically an execution graph of tasks, this graph is commonly known as a _DAG_ (Directed Acyclic Graph).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A pipeline is an execution graph of tasks, commonly known as a _DAG_ (Directed Acyclic Graph).
```

> A DAG is a directed graph with no cycles aka no direct loops.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A DAG is a directed graph without any cycles, i.e. direct loops.
```

====

> OpenShift AI offers two out of the box mechanisms to build Data Science Pipelines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OpenShift AI offers two out-of-the-box mechanisms to work with Data Science Pipelines in terms of building and triggering pipelines.
```

> The first mechanism is the Elyra Jupyter notebook addon which provides a visual editor for creating pipelines via orchestration of Jupyter notebooks. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first mechanism is the _Elyra Pipelines_ JupyterLab extension, which provides a visual editor for creating pipelines based on Jupyter notebooks as well as Python or R scripts. 
```

> The second mechanism and the one discussed here is using Data Science Pipelines (DSP) based on the upstream KubeflowPipelines V1. With DSP, pipelines are built using python scripts using the KFPV1 python SDK. Once built, the python pipeline is submitted to the DSP runtime to be scheduled for execution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The second mechanism and the one discussed here is based on the Kubeflow Pipelines SDK. With the SDK, pipelines are built using Python scripts and submitted to the Data Science Pipelines runtime to be scheduled for execution.
```

[NOTE]
====

> There is work in progress to migrate DSP to Kubeflow Pipeline V2. At the time of writing this is still a work in progress and we won't cover it here.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is work in progress to integrate Kubeflow Pipelines version 2 in Data Science Pipelines. At the time of writing Kubeflow Pipelines version 1 is used, which needs to be considered when referring to the SDK documentation.
```

====

> In OpenShift AI we use the *_Tekton_* runtime to execute pipelines. With this there is an additional step to be performed the python script needs to be compiled into a Tekton definition before being submitting to the runtime

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In OpenShift AI we use the *_Tekton_* runtime to execute pipelines, which is why the Python script needs to be compiled into a Tekton definition before it can be submitted to the runtime.
```

> In OpenShift AI the Data Science Pipeline runtime consists of the following components:

Reviewer 3: I believe a detailed breakdown of the technical components and a list of running pods might be too much detail for this introductory course. It doesn't seem important for understanding how to use the Kubeflow Pipelines SDK for Data Science Pipelines.

* A Pipeline scheduler for scheduling pipeline runs.
* A Persistent Agent to record the set of containers that executed as well as their inputs and outputs.

Steps in the pipeline are executed as ephemeral pods (one per step).

[NOTE]
====
DS Pipeline in OpenShift AI are managed by the `data-science-pipelines-operator-controller-manager` operator in the `redhat-ods-applications` namespace. The CRD is an instance of _datasciencepipelinesapplications.datasciencepipelinesapplications.opendatahub.io_
====

.DataScience Pipeline pods
[source,cmd]
----
 ~/oc get pods -n redhat-ods-applications
NAME                                                              READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
ds-pipeline-persistenceagent-pipelines-definition-6d6676d58vzss   1/1     Running   0          9m49s
ds-pipeline-pipelines-definition-7c7dd56b4d-qfz8t                 2/2     Running   0          9m49s
ds-pipeline-scheduledworkflow-pipelines-definition-7f5c645hcg4g   1/1     Running   0          9m48s
mariadb-pipelines-definition-795c57795b-27ljh                     1/1     Running   0          9m49s
----

== Creating a Data Science Pipeline with the KFP SDK

=== Prerequisites 
* Python Setup

> [source,cmd]

Reviewer 3: Move this custom workbench image? Would need to be discussed with the owners of the RHODS administration course.

Author: Useful if they're not using notebooks for development

----
pip install kfp==1.8
pip install kfp-tekton==1.7.2
----

> IMPORTANT: Using the correct python module versions is critical to avoid conflicts between kfp SDK versions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: Using the correct Python module versions is critical to avoid conflicts between the KFP SDK and Data Science Pipelines versions.
```

* S3 Storage

> Follow these instructions to setup a local Minio instance

Reviewer 3: I think we should mention that ODF, for instance, can be used too, and why we're choosing Minio.

Author: will do

https://ai-on-openshift.io/tools-and-applications/minio/minio/

=== Creating a Pipeline Server

> To execute pipelines a _Pipeline server_ needs to be created but before that can happen an S3 Storage bucket needs to be configured. This is used to store the run artifacts and outputs of any pipeline run on the associated server. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To execute pipelines a _Pipeline server_ needs to be created, which in turn depends on the creation of an S3 Storage bucket. This is used to store the run artifacts and outputs of any pipeline run on the associated server. 
```

****
image::creating-data-connection.png[]
****

> Once the data connection is created then the pipeline server can be created

Reviewer 3: How about taking the simpler approach of creating a data connection as part of pipeline server configuration?

      "random-num"}], "print-msg-3": [{"name": "random-num-2-Output", "parent_task":
      "random-num-2"}], "print-msg-4": [{"name": "random-num-2-Output", "parent_task":
      "random-num-2"}]}'
    tekton.dev/artifact_bucket: mlpipeline
    tekton.dev/artifact_endpoint: minio-service.kubeflow:9000
    tekton.dev/artifact_endpoint_scheme: http://
    tekton.dev/artifact_items: '{"flip-coin": [["Output", "$(results.Output.path)"]],
      "print-msg": [], "print-msg-2": [], "print-msg-3": [], "print-msg-4": [], "random-num":
      [["Output", "$(results.Output.path)"]], "random-num-2": [["Output", "$(results.Output.path)"]]}'
    sidecar.istio.io/inject: "false"
    tekton.dev/template: ''
----
****

The resulting yaml file _(coin-toss.yaml)_ can then be uploaded throught the UI
****
image::import-pipeline.png[]
****
****
image::pipeline-imported.png[]
****
Once imported the structure of the _DAG_ will be shown. Each step in the pipeline will be run as a container on OpenShift.

****
image::pipeline-run-view.png[]
****

To execute the pipeline, click on _Create Run_ in the menu and fill out the _Name_ and _Description_.

> If the pipeline has _Input Parameters_ or a you need to schedule a recurring run then that can be configured further down. Once ready clink _Create_ and the pipeline will be scheduled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the pipeline has _Input Parameters_ or you need to schedule a recurring run, then that can be configured further down. Once ready, click _Create_ to submit the pipeline for scheduling.
```

****
image::creating-pipeline-run.png[]
****

The pipeline will execute and the outputs will be stored into the configured S3 bucket.

> As the pipeline executes the view will be updated to show the steps being executed. It's possible to click on the graph nodes to reveal information of the steps

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As the pipeline executes the view will be updated to show the steps being executed. It's possible to click on the graph nodes to reveal information of the steps.
```

****
image::post-pipeline-run.png[]
****

> Once the pipeline has completed it is possible to access the output and pipeline artifacts (if used) in the Minio Storage UI

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once the pipeline has completed, it is possible to access the output and pipeline artifacts (if used) in the object storage browser of the Minio Storage UI.
```

Reviewer 3: Where can they access the Minio UI?

****
image::object-store-after-run.png[]
****

=== Experiments And Runs

An experiment is a workspace where you can try different configurations of your pipelines. You can use experiments to organize your runs into logical groups. Experiments can contain arbitrary runs, including recurring runs. 

> A run can be configured using the DSP UI or programatically using the _kfp SDK_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A run can be configured using the DSP UI or programatically using the _KFP SDK_.
```

image::dsp-runs.png[]

> NOTE: Experiments are part of the KFP SDK and is not currently covered in this course.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NOTE: Experiments are part of the KFP SDK and are not currently covered in this course.
```

== Real World Example

In this section we're going to demonstrate a real world Data Science Pipelines scenario. 

****

> In this scenario we have a remote edge device which uses an AI model to manage the characteristics of its battery usage depending on the environment it's deployed in. On a regular schedule it uploads battery events via a data gateway and those batter events are used to train a model which is then retrieved by the device and used. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this scenario we have a remote edge device which uses an AI model to manage the characteristics of its battery usage depending on the environment it's deployed in. On a regular schedule it uploads battery events via a data gateway, and those battery events are used to train a model which is then retrieved by the device and used. 
```

image::openshift-ai-dsp-edge.png[]
****

The entire pipeline is here xref:attachment$sample-pipeline-full.py[Pipeline]

We're not going to go through all of it but focus on the key aspects of it. 

The actual pipeline is defined by the following function:

****
[source,python]
include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=445..454]
****

The '@dsl.pipeline' parameters provide the name and description if you were uploading the pipeline via an API call. The DSP UI overwrites these values.

The function *_edgetest_pipeline_* is the implementation of the pipeline.

=== Pipeline Parameters

> The pipeline has four parameters

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The pipeline has four parameters:
```

* _file_obj_ and _src_bucket_ refer to S3 bucket details and can be ignored.

> * _VIN_ is the edge device identifier and has a default value of 412356

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* _VIN_ is the edge device identifier and has a default value of 412356.
```

> * _epoch_count_ is the number of training epochs to be used

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* _epoch_count_ is the number of training epochs to be used.
```

> In the _Create Run_ UI these parameters are available so that users can override the values as they need

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the _Create Run_ UI these parameters are available so that users can override the values as they need.
```

****
image::pipeline-parameters.png[]
****

=== Pipeline Steps

> The file contains the following python functions which roughly correspond to the steps in the diagram above

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The file contains the following Python functions, which roughly correspond to the steps in the diagram above
```

* load_trigger_data()
* prep_data_train_model()
* model_upload_notify()
* model_inference()

> These functions are mapped into individual containers by using the _create_component_from_func_ function. You can specify the container _base_image_ to use as well as any additional python packages to be installed into the container at execution time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These functions are mapped into individual containers by using the _create_component_from_func_ function. You can specify the container _base_image_ to use as well as any additional Python packages to be installed into the container at execution time.
```

[source,python]
include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=433..443]

> The python functions can be used in multiple different step definitions; in the example the _prep_data_train_model_ function is used in the _prep_data_train_op_ and the _prep_inference_data_op_ containers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Python functions can be used in multiple different step definitions; in the example the _prep_data_train_model_ function is used in the _prep_data_train_op_ and the _prep_inference_data_op_ containers.
```

The pipeline execution _graph_ is created using the following code:

[source,python]
include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=471]

[source,python]
include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=477]

[source,python]
include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=482]

[source,python]
include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=492]

[source,python]
include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=495]

[IMPORTANT] 
====
The execution order of the graph is top down but also can be controlled by using the *_.after()_* operator. 

There are other operators which control the flow of pipeline execution such as _Condition_ , _ExitHandler_, _ParallelFor_ .

> These are not covered as part of this course but the the 'https://github.com/kubeflow/pipelines/blob/master/samples/tutorials/DSL%20-%20Control%20structures/DSL%20-%20Control%20structures.py[KFP documentation]' has examples.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These are not covered as part of this course but the https://github.com/kubeflow/pipelines/blob/master/samples/tutorials/DSL%20-%20Control%20structures/DSL%20-%20Control%20structures.py[KFP documentation] has examples.
```

====

The following diagram shows the order of execution.

****
image::pipeline-graph.png[]
****

> This is also visable in the OpenShift AI user interface:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is also visible in the OpenShift AI user interface:
```

****
image::oai-pipeline-graph.png[]
****

=== Pipeline Parameter Passing
As each step of our pipeline is executed in an independent container, input parameters and output values are handled as follows.

==== Input Parameters

* Simple parameters - booleans, numbers, strings - are passed by value into the container as command line arguments.
* Complex types or large amounts of data are passed via files. The value of the input parameter is the file path.

==== Output Parameters

* Output values are returned via files.

==== Passing Parameters via Files
To pass an input parameter as a file, the function argument needs to be annotated using the _InputPath_ annotation.
For returning data from a step as a file, the function argument needs to be annotated using the _OutputPath_ annotation.

In both cases the actual value of the parameter is the file path and not the actual data. So the pipeline will have to read/write to the file as necessary.

> For example in our sample pipeline we use the _parameter_data_ argument of the _prep_data_train_model_ function to return multiple data values as a file, here's the function definition with the _OutputPath_ annotation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, in our sample pipeline we use the _parameter_data_ argument of the _prep_data_train_model_ function to return multiple data values as a file. Here's the function definition with the _OutputPath_ annotation
```

[source,python]
include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=51]

Here's the actual writing of the data to the file

[source,python]
include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=238..242]

This data is then consumed in the _model_upload_notify_ function, passed via the _paramater_data_ with the _InputPath_ annotation.

[source,python]
include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=243]

Reading the data

[source,python]
include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=275..276]

Linking the two functions together 

[source,python]
include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=482]

[TIP]
====
There are other parameter annotations available to handle specialised file types 

> For example _InputBinaryFile_, _OutputBinaryFile_. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
such as _InputBinaryFile_, _OutputBinaryFile_. 
```

The full annotation list is in the https://kubeflow-pipelines.readthedocs.io/en/1.8.22/source/kfp.components.html[KFP component documentation].

====

==== Returning multiple values from a step 
If you return a single small value from your component using the _return_ statement, the output parameter is named *_output_*.

> It is however possible to return multiple small values using the python _collection_ library method _namedtuple_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is, however, possible to return multiple small values using the Python _collection_ library method _namedtuple_.
```

From a https://github.com/kubeflow/pipelines/blob/master/samples/tutorials/Data%20passing%20in%20python%20components.ipynb[Kubeflow pipelines example]
 
[source,python]
----
def produce_two_small_outputs() -> NamedTuple('Outputs', [('text', str), ('number', int)]):
    return ("data 1", 42)
consume_task3 = consume_two_arguments(produce2_task.outputs['text'], produce2_task.outputs['number'])
----

====

> The kfp SDK uses the following rules to define the input and output parameter names in your component’s interface:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The KFP SDK uses the following rules to define the input and output parameter names in your component’s interface:
```

    . If the argument name ends with _path and the argument is annotated as an _kfp.components.InputPath_ or _kfp.components.OutputPath_, the parameter name is the argument name with the trailing _path removed.
    . If the argument name ends with _file, the parameter name is the argument name with the trailing _file removed.
    . If you return a single small value from your component using the return statement, the output parameter is named *output*.
    . If you return several small values from your component by returning a _collections.namedtuple_, the SDK uses the tuple’s field names as the output parameter names.

    . Otherwise, the SDK uses the argument name as the parameter name.
====

[TIP]
====

> In the Tekton definition you can see the definition of the _input and output artifacts_ this can be useful for debugging purposes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the Tekton definition you can see the definition of the _input and output artifacts_. This can be useful for debugging purposes.
```

include::example$sample-pipeline-full.yaml[lines=12..18]

include::example$sample-pipeline-full.yaml[lines=6..11]

include::example$sample-pipeline-full.yaml[lines=22..25]

> You can also see the locations of data stored into the _s3_ bucket e.g. _artifacts/$PIPELINERUN/prep-data-train-model-2/parameter_data.tgz_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also see the locations of data stored into the S3 bucket e.g. _artifacts/$PIPELINERUN/prep-data-train-model-2/parameter_data.tgz_
```

====

=== Execution on OpenShift

To enable the _pipeline_ to run on OpenShift we need to pass it the associated _kubernetes_ resources 

* _volumes_ 
* _environment variables_
* _node selectors, taints and tolerations_

==== Volumes
Our pipeline requires a number of volumes to be created and mounted into the executing pods. The volumes are primarily used for storage and secrets handling but can also be used for passing configuration files into the pods.

Before mounting the volumes into the pods they need to be created. The following code creates two volumes, one from a pre-existing PVC and another from a pre-existing secret.

include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=453..462]

The volumes are mounted into the containers using the *_add_pvolumes_* method:

include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=495..497]

==== Environment Variables

Environment variables can be added to the pod using the *_add_env_variable_* method. 

include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=471..475]

[NOTE]
====

> The *_env_from_secret_* utility method also enables extracting values from secrets and mounting them as environment variables, in the example above the _AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID_ value is extracted from the _s3-secret_ secret and added to the container defintion as the _s3_access_key_ environment variable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The *_env_from_secret_* utility method also enables extracting values from secrets and mounting them as environment variables. In the example above the _AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID_ value is extracted from the _s3-secret_ secret and added to the container defintion as the _s3_access_key_ environment variable.
```

====

==== Node Selectors, Taints and Tolerations

> Selecting the correct worker node to execute a pipeline step is an important part of pipeline development. Specific nodes may have dedicated hardware i.e. GPUs etc, also there may be other constraints e.g. data locality. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Selecting the correct worker node to execute a pipeline step is an important part of pipeline development. Specific nodes may have dedicated hardware such as GPUs; or there may be other constraints such as data locality. 
```

> In our example we're using the nodes with an attached GPU to execute the step, to do this we need to:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In our example we're using the nodes with an attached GPU to execute the step. To do this we need to:
```

. Create the requisite toleration:

include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=464..467]

. Add the _toleration_ to the pod and add a _node selector_ constraint.

include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=477..480]

[TIP]
====
You could also use this approach to ensure that pods without GPU needs are *not* scheduled to nodes with GPUs.

For global pipeline pod settings take a look at the *_PipelineConf_* class in the 'https://kubeflow-pipelines.readthedocs.io/en/1.8.22/source/kfp.dsl.html?highlight=add_env_variable#kfp.dsl.PipelineConf'[KFP SDK Documentation]. 
====

[NOTE]
====

> We have only covered a _subset_ of what's possible with the _kfp SDK_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We have only covered a _subset_ of what's possible with the _KFP SDK_.
```

It is also possible to customise significant parts of the _pod spec_ definition with:

* Init and Sidecar Pods
* Pod affinity rules
* Annotations and labels
* Retries and Timeouts
* Resource requests and limits

See the the https://kubeflow-pipelines.readthedocs.io/en/1.8.22/source/kfp.dsl.html[KFP SDK Documentation] for more details.
====

=== Compiling to Tekton 

> As stated previously DSP python scripts need to be compiled into Tekton definitions for execution. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As stated previously, DSP Python scripts need to be compiled into Tekton definitions for execution. 
```

This can be achieved in multiple ways:

> . Explicity calling the "dsl-compile" command from the _kfp_ python package giving the input and output files. Then uploading the resultant yaml file to the DSP server via the UI

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Explicity calling the "dsl-compile" command from the _kfp_ Python package giving the input and output files, then uploading the resultant yaml file to the DSP server via the UI.
```

> . Adding the compile step to the python script and then uploading the resultant yaml file to the DSP server via the UI.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Adding the compile step to the Python script and then uploading the resultant yaml file to the DSP server via the UI.
```

> . Adding the compile step to the python script and uploading the resulting tekton definition via an api call.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Adding the compile step to the Python script and uploading the resulting Tekton definition via an api call.
```

Reviewer 3: We can even skip the explicit compilation step in this case and directly submit the pipeline to the pipeline server, in which case it's automatically compiled.

> In our example we've chosen the second option for no good particular reason:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In our example we've chosen the second option:
```

include::example$sample-pipeline-full.py[lines=511]

> The Tekton compiler also has a number of _global setting_ which are not covered here see https://github.com/kubeflow/kfp-tekton/blob/master/sdk/python/kfp_tekton/compiler/pipeline_utils.py[Here] for more.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Tekton compiler also has a number of _global settings_, which are not covered here, see https://github.com/kubeflow/kfp-tekton/blob/master/sdk/python/kfp_tekton/compiler/pipeline_utils.py[here] for more details.
```

[IMPORTANT]
====
We have only covered a subset of the functionality avaiable in DSP as it pertains to our real-life scenario. Please see the https://github.com/kubeflow/kfp-tekton/blob/master/sdk/FEATURES.md[kfp-tekton features] document for more advanced functionality.
====

=== Triggering a DSP pipeline

> In our real-world example above the entire pipeline is executed when a file is added to an _s3_ bucket. Here is the process followed:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In our real-world example above the entire pipeline is executed when a file is added to an S3 bucket. Here is the process followed:
```

> . File added to _s3_ bucket.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. File added to S3 bucket.
```

> . S3 triggers the send of a webhook payload to a _OCP Serverless_ function

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. S3 triggers the send of a webhook payload to an _OCP Serverless_ function.
```

> . The _Serverless_ function parses the payload and invokes the configured _DSP pipeline_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. The _Serverless_ function parses the payload and invokes the configured _DSP pipeline_.
```

> We're not going to go through all of the code and configuration for this but here is the code to trigger the pipeline.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We're not going to go through the code and configuration for this, but here is the code to trigger the pipeline.
```

[source,python]
include::example$dsp_trigger.py[lines=34..51]

> The full code is xref:attachment$dsp_trigger.py[Here]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The full code is xref:attachment$dsp_trigger.py[here].
```
